Rules of Procedure


Rule 1. Quorum
A quorum shall consist of the majority of the voting members participating at roll call. 
Rule 2. Roll Call
Roll call shall be conducted before debate opens. A member state may wish to be Present or Present and Voting. A Present state may abstain, while a Present and Voting member must vote on all matters.
Rule 3. Disruptivity
Motions shall be voted on in the order of most to least disruptive. Motions are considered more disruptive the more the motion interrupts or redirects the flow of debate.
Rule 4. Yields
A member state can yield any remaining time on the floor to the Chair or any other member state.
Rule 5. Motion to Set the Agenda
This motion sets the agenda to the specified topic. The following debate must adhere to the topics set in the agenda.
Rule 6. Motion to Open Debate
This motion opens debate on the agenda topic(s).
Rule 7. Motion to Suspend the Rules for the Purposes of a Moderated Caucus
This motion must specify:
The duration of the moderated caucus,
The speaking time for speakers in the moderated caucus, and
The topic of the moderated caucus.
The Chair shall decide who speaks in a moderated caucus. The motioning state may reserve the right to speak first or last.
Rule 8. Motion to Suspend the Rules for the Purposes of an Unmoderated Caucus
This motion must specify the duration of the unmoderated caucus. After the duration of the caucus has elapsed, a state may motion to extend the unmoderated caucus for no longer than half of the original duration.
Rule 9. Motion to Suspend the Rules for the Purposes of a Round Robin
This motion must specify: 
The speaking time for each member state,
The topic of the round robin, and
The order in which member states will be called to the floor.
All member states must come to the floor during a round robin.
Rule 10. Motion to Suspend the Rules for the Purposes of a Gentleman’s Unmoderated Caucus
This motion is equivalent to the motion outlined in Rule 8, but with the added condition that member states are not permitted to leave their seats. A topic may be required at the Chair’s discretion.
Rule 11. Motion to Open the General Speakers List
This motion must specify the speaking time for member states. It is the Chair’s discretion on how many states will speak and will call upon states to the floor.
Rule 12. Working Papers
Members of the committee shall begin drafting their working papers. Working papers are considered the precursor to draft resolutions. There is no expectation that working papers comply with preambular and operative clause structures. Working papers may only be drafted during unmoderated caucuses.
Rule 13. Draft Resolutions
If a member state submits a working paper to the dais, then it is considered a draft resolution. A draft resolution must comply with preambular and operative clause structure. The draft resolution must have a certain number of sponsors and signatories as deemed necessary by the Chair.
Rule 14. Author’s Panel
A draft resolution is expected to have an author’s panel. An author’s panel is a small group of member states who will present the draft resolution to the committee. Members of the author’s panel should have contributed a plurality of the paper’s content and be knowledgeable on the reasoning behind and implications of the clauses. 
Rule 15. Sponsors and Signatories
A sponsor is a member state that supports the draft resolution and has contributed portions of its writing. A signatory is a member state who does not necessarily support the draft resolution, but is willing to hear the paper debated. 
Rule 16. Motion to Present Draft Resolutions
This motion can specify:
A reading period with a defined length,
A presentation period with a defined length,
A Q&A period with a defined length,
Afterwards, debate continues as before.
Rule 17. Motion to Amend
This motion must specify:
The draft resolution to be amended,
The clause to be amended, and
The proposed amendment language.
An amendment may add, delete, or modify a clause in the draft resolution. Amendments are classified as either friendly or unfriendly. A friendly amendment is accepted by all sponsors of the draft resolution and is automatically incorporated into the text without a vote. An unfriendly amendment is not accepted by all sponsors and must be voted on by the committee. If passed by a simple majority, the amendment is incorporated into the draft resolution's text. If failed, the draft resolution remains unchanged. Amendments to amendments are not permitted.
Rule 18. Motion for Division of the Question
This motion allows parts of draft resolutions or amendments to be voted on separately from the composite.
Rule 19. Motion to Suspend Debate
This motion suspends debate. No further motions will be heard except for motion to open debate. This motion will only be entertained at the chair’s discretion during certain times (i.e. before lunch).
Rule 20. Motion to Close Debate
This motion closes debate. No further motions will be heard. The committee ceased meeting. This motion will only be entertained at the chair’s discretion during certain times (i.e. end of conference).
Rule 21. Motion to Enter Voting Procedure
This motion must specify:
If there will be a 2-for-2-against period, and if so, must specify,
The speaking time, and
The order of speakers,
The order in which papers will be voted in, and
In what manner the vote will be taken, as described in Rule 22.
During voting procedure, any member state that identified as Present and Voting is not permitted to leave.
Rule 22. Voting Manner
The following manners are considered valid, in addition to any others deemed valid by the Chair:
Vote by Acclamation — The paper is considered adopted if no member state raises an objection within the Chair’s allotted time.
Vote by Roll Call — The Chair will follow the roll call list. When the member state is called, it must indicate its vote.
Vote by Placard — Member states voting in favor raise their placards. Then, member states voting against raise their placards. Finally, member states abstaining raise their placards.
All draft resolutions must be voted on in the same manner.
Rule 23. Adoption
During voting procedure, a draft resolution is adopted if the votes in favor meet a two-thirds majority. If the committee adopts multiple resolutions with conflicting clauses, the clause in the paper that was voted finally is the clause considered valid.
Rule 24. Point of Order
At any moment, a member state may raise a point of order if a procedural matter has been violated by the dais.
Rule 25. Point of Personal Privilege
At any moment, a member state may raise a point of personal privilege if the delegate has a problem that prevents their participation in the committee. Topics include, but are not limited to:
The delegate cannot hear,
The delegate must use the restroom, or
The delegate cannot read the presented draft resolution.
Rule 26. Point of Inquiry
A member state may raise a point of inquiry if the delegate has a question about a procedural matter. This point may not interrupt other speakers and may only be raised when the Chair asks for points.
Rule 27. Language
The official and working languages of this committee will be English. Other languages may be used, provided an interpreter is present. The member state is required to provide their own interpreter.
Rule 28. Acceptable Technology Use
Technology, including but not limited to laptops, smartphones, and tablets, are not permitted to be used except during an unmoderated caucus.
Rule 29. Acceptable Use of Artificial Intelligence
The willingful use of large language models is prohibited during the committee. No part of a working paper or draft resolution may be prepared by a large language model.
Rule 30. Pre-Writing
Pre-writing is defined as writing clauses outside of committee to be used during committee. PantherMUNC has a zero-tolerance policy for pre-writing. The resolutions and working papers should be a product of delegates’ own interpretation of the debate. Every member of the dais is encouraged to look out for pre-writing, including observations of a delegate’s notes and the version history of the working paper or draft resolution. Delegates who are found to be pre-writing will be disqualified from all awards.